Transaction Context Propagation Proposal (#32)
open-feature/ofep: 007-OFEP-transaction-context-propagation.md

## Transaction Context Propagation

## State: DRAFTING

> Evaluation context is a container for all contextual data that can be used used to conditionally control the value returned from a flag evaluation. Traditionally, a developer would be responsible for explicitly defining evaluation context during flag evaluation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Evaluation context is a container for all contextual data that can be used used to conditionally control the value returned from a flag evaluation. Currently, developers are responsible for explicitly defining and supplying evaluation context during flag evaluation.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Flag evaluation may be affected by contextual data including Global, Client, Invocation, and Hook Context.
This proposal defines a new type of context called Evaluation Context.

Evaluation context is a container for all contextual data that can be used used to conditionally control the value returned from a flag evaluation. Traditionally, a developer would be responsible for explicitly defining evaluation context during flag evaluation.
```

> Transaction context, a subset of the evaluation context, is a container for transaction specific data (e.g. user id, user agent, IP) that lives for the duration of a transaction. With transaction context propagation, a developer can set transaction context where it's convenient (e.g. an auth service) and have it persist for the length of a transaction (e.g. a request or thread). OpenFeature will then merge transaction context with evaluation context before flag evaluation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Transaction context_, a subset of the evaluation context, is a container for transaction specific data (e.g. user id, user agent, IP) that lives for the duration of a transaction. With transaction context propagation, a developer can set transaction context where it's convenient (e.g. an auth service) and have it persist for the length of a transaction (e.g. a request or thread). OpenFeature will then merge transaction context with evaluation context before flag evaluation.
```

> Evaluation context is a container for all contextual data that can be used used to conditionally control the value returned from a flag evaluation. Traditionally, a developer would be responsible for explicitly defining evaluation context during flag evaluation.
> 
> Transaction context, a subset of the evaluation context, is a container for transaction specific data (e.g. user id, user agent, IP) that lives for the duration of a transaction. With transaction context propagation, a developer can set transaction context where it's convenient (e.g. an auth service) and have it persist for the length of a transaction (e.g. a request or thread). OpenFeature will then merge transaction context with evaluation context before flag evaluation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Flag evaluation may be affected by [evaluation context](link here) data including global, client, invocation, and hook context.
Traditionally, a developer would be responsible for explicitly defining evaluation context during flag evaluation.
This proposal defines a new type of evaluation context called transaction context.

Transaction context is a container for transaction-specific evaluation context (e.g. user id, user agent, IP).
With transaction context propagation, a developer can set transaction context where it's convenient (e.g. an auth service) and it will automatically be applied to all flag evaluations within a transaction.
Transaction context will typically be propagated using a language-specific carrier such as thread local storage or another similar mechanism.
```

## Background

Many languages provide a mechanism for storing data for the length of a single transaction. This can be used to store transaction context that can be automatically merged with the evaluation context before flag evaluation. The implementation will vary by technology. For example, Java may use [ThreadLocal][thread-local], Golang may use [Go Context][go-context], and Node may use [async hooks][async-hooks].

## Proposal

> This proposal introduces a way to register a transaction context propagator to the global OpenFeature API. Once registered, transaction context can be defined at any point in the transaction. When a flag is evaluated, the transaction context is merged with evaluation context based on the merge order defined below.

Reviewer 3: How does a developer set the transaction context at any point in the transaction?

Author: It would depend on the technology but there's an example using NodeJS later in the proposal.

> This proposal introduces a way to register a transaction context propagator to the global OpenFeature API. Once registered, transaction context can be defined at any point in the transaction. When a flag is evaluated, the transaction context is merged with evaluation context based on the merge order defined below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal introduces a way to register a transaction context propagator to the global OpenFeature API. Once registered, transaction context can be augmented or mutated at any point in the transaction. When a flag is evaluated, the transaction context is merged with evaluation context based on the merge order defined below.
```

In some runtimes (e.g. node), there isn't a native solution for transaction context propagation that would work in all situations. For that reason, it would be beneficial to provide the ability to register a transaction propagator on the global OpenFeature API.

```typescript
/**
 * An example transaction context manager that utilizes async_hooks added in
 * node 12.17 and marked as stable in node 16.4
 */
class AsyncLocalStorageTransactionContext implements TransactionContextManager {
  private asyncLocalStorage = new AsyncLocalStorage<EvaluationContext>();

  getTransactionContext(): EvaluationContext {
    return this.asyncLocalStorage.getStore() ?? {};
  }

  setTransactionContext(
    context: EvaluationContext,
    callback: () => void
  ): void {
    this.asyncLocalStorage.run(context, callback);
  }
}

OpenFeature.setTransactionContextPropagator(
  new AsyncLocalStorageTransactionContext()
);
```

### Set Transaction Context

Setting transaction context will vary based on the language. In JavaScript, it may look like this:

```typescript
/**
 * This example is based on an express middleware.
 */
use(req: Request, _res: Response, next: NextFunction) {

>   OpenFeature.setTransactionContext({ targetingKey: req.user.id }, () => {

Reviewer 3: Conceptually I understand that the benefit of using the transaction context here versus the global evaluation context is that this context only lives for the duration of this transaction whereas the global evaluation lives on.
However, I'm not following how this transaction context dies at the end of the transaction?

Reviewer: The transaction context is stored on the [continuation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Continuation); practically this means that it's accessible only to functions further down the same call stack. This is why the `setTransactionContext()` wraps `next()` (in express, as well as most nodejs web frameworks, `next()` passes the request to the next handler, continuing the execution.

Once the stack is popped back to this point, the data in the continuation is no longer accessible, and GC'd.

## Transaction Context Propagation

## State: DRAFTING

Evaluation context is a container for all contextual data that can be used used to conditionally control the value returned from a flag evaluation. Traditionally, a developer would be responsible for explicitly defining evaluation context during flag evaluation.

Transaction context, a subset of the evaluation context, is a container for transaction specific data (e.g. user id, user agent, IP) that lives for the duration of a transaction. With transaction context propagation, a developer can set transaction context where it's convenient (e.g. an auth service) and have it persist for the length of a transaction (e.g. a request or thread). OpenFeature will then merge transaction context with evaluation context before flag evaluation.

## Background

> Many languages provide a mechanism for storing data for the length of a single transaction. This can be used to store transaction context that can be automatically merged with the evaluation context before flag evaluation. The implementation will vary by technology. For example, Java may use [thread local][thread-local], Golang may use [Go Context][go-context], and Node may use [async hooks][async-hooks].

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Many languages provide a mechanism for storing data for the length of a single transaction. This can be used to store transaction context that can be automatically merged with the evaluation context before flag evaluation. The implementation will vary by technology. For example, Java may use [ThreadLocal][thread-local], Golang may use [Go Context][go-context], and Node may use [async hooks][async-hooks].
```
Nitpick.
